<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>The King was pacing the long terrace on the river front. He had been there since very early, for he could not sleep at nights, and had no appetite for his breakfast. When a gentleman from the postern gate asked permission for Culpepper and the mule to pass to the private stairs, he said heavily:</p>
				<p>“Let me not be elbowed by cripples,” and then: ’a’ God’s name let them come,” changing his mind, as was his custom after a bad night, before his first words had left his thick, heavy lips. His great brow was furrowed, his enormous bulk of scarlet, with the great double dog-rose embroidered across the broad chest, limped a little over his right knee and the foot dragged. His eyes were bloodshot and heavy, his head hung forward as though he were about to charge the world with his forehead. From time to time his eyebrows lifted painfully, and he swallowed with an effort as if he were choking.</p>
				<p>Behind him the three hundred windows of the palace Placentia seemed to peer at him like eyes, curious, hostile, lugubrious or amazed. He tore violently at his collar and muttered: “I stifle.” His great hand was swollen by its glove, sewn with pearls, to an immense size.</p>
				<p>The gentleman told him of the riot in the park, and narrated the blasphemy of the German Lutheran, who had held up a putrid dog in parody of the Holy Mass.</p>
				<p>The face of the King grew suffused with purple blood.</p>
				<p>“Let those men be cut down,” he said, and he conceived a sorting out of all heresy, a cleansing of his land with blood. He looked swiftly at the low sky as if a thunderbolt or a leprosy must descend upon his head. He commanded swiftly, “Let them be taken in scores. Bid the gentlemen of my guard go, and armourers with shackles.”</p>
				<p>The sharp pain of the ulcer in his leg gnawed up to his thigh, and he stood, dejected, like a hunted man, with his head hanging on his chest, so that his great bonnet pointed at the ground. He commanded that both Privy Seal and the Duke of Norfolk should come to him there upon the instant.</p>
				<p>This grey and heavy King, who had been a great scholar, dreaded to read in Latin now, for it brought the language of the Mass into his mind; he had been a composer of music and a skilful player on the lute, but no music and no voices could any more tickle his ears.</p>
				<p>Women he had loved well in his day. Now, when he desired rest, music, good converse and the love of women, he was forced to wed with a creature whose face resembled that of a pig stuck with cloves. He had raged over-night, but, with the morning, he had seen himself growing old, on a tottering throne, assailed by all the forces of the Old Faith in Christendom. Rebellions burst out like fires every day in all the corners of his land. He had no men whom he could trust: if he granted a boon to one party it held them only for a day, and the other side rose up. Now he rested upon the Lutherans, whom he hated, and, standing on that terrace, he had watched gloomily the great State barges of the Ambassadors from the Empire and from France come with majestic ostentation downstream abreast, to moor side by side against the steps of his water-gate.</p>
				<p>It was a parade of their new friendship. Six months ago their trains could not have mingled without bloodshed.</p>
				<p>At last there stood before him Thomas Cromwell, un-bonneted, smiling, humorous, supple and confident for himself and for his master’s cause, a man whom his Prince might trust. And the long melancholy and sinister figure of the Duke of Norfolk stalked stiffly down among the yew trees powdered with frost. The furs from round his neck fluttered about his knees like the wings of a crow, and he dug his Earl Marshal’s golden staff viciously into the ground. He waved his jewelled cap and stood still at a little distance. Cromwell regarded him with a sinister and watchful amusement; he looked back at Privy Seal with a black malignancy that hardened his yellow features, his hooked nose and pursed lips into the likeness of a mask representing hatred.</p>
				<p>This Norfolk was that Earl of Surrey who had won Flodden Field. They all then esteemed him the greatest captain of his day⁠—in the field a commander sleepless, cunning, cautious, and, in striking, a Hotspur.</p>
				<p>A dour and silent man, he was the head of all the Catholics, of all the reaction of that day. But, in the long duel between himself and Cromwell he had seemed fated to be driven from post to post, never daring to proclaim himself openly the foe of the man he dreaded and hated. Cranmer, with his tolerant spirit, he despised. Here was an archbishop who might rack and burn for discipline’s sake, and he did nothing.⁠ ⁠… And all these New Learning men with their powers of language, these dark bearded men with twinkling and sagacious eyes, he detested. He went clean shaved, lean and yellow-faced, with a hooked nose that seemed about to dig into his chin. It was he who said first: “It was merry in England before this New Learning came in.”</p>
				<p>The night before, the King had sworn that he would have Privy Seal’s head because Anne of Cleves resembled a pig stuck with cloves. And, shaking and shivering with cold that penetrated his very inwards, with a black pain on his brow and sparks dancing before his jaundiced eyes, the Duke cursed himself for not having urged then the immediate arrest of the Privy Seal. For here stood Cromwell, arrogantly by the King’s side with the King graciously commanding him to cover his head because it was very cold and Cromwell was known to suffer with the earache.</p>
				<p>“You are Earl Marshal,” the King’s voice drowned Norfolk’s morning greeting. He veered upon the Duke with such violence that his enormous red bulk seemed about to totter over upon the tall and bent figure. A searing pain had shot up his side, and, as he gripped it, he appeared to be furiously plucking at his dagger. He had imagined Chapuys and Marillac, the Ambassadors, coming upon guards with broken heads and sending to Paris letters over which Francis and his nephew should snigger and chuckle.</p>
				<p>“You are Earl Marshal. You have the ordering of these ceremonies, and you let rebels and knaves break heads within my very park for all the world to see!”</p>
				<p>In his rage Norfolk blurted out:</p>
				<p>“Privy Seal hath his friends, too⁠—these Lutherans. What man could have foreseen how insolent they be grown, for joy at welcoming a Queen of their faith,” he repeated hotly. “No man could have foreseen. My bands are curtailed.”</p>
				<p>Cromwell said:</p>
				<p>“Aye, men are needed to keep down the Papists of your North parts.”</p>
				<p>The two men faced each other. It had been part of the Duke’s plan⁠—and Cromwell knew it very well⁠—that the City men should meet with the Lutherans there in the King’s own park. It would show the insolence of the heretics upon whom the Privy Seal relied, and it might prove, too, the strength of the Old Faith in the stronghold of the City.</p>
				<p>Henry rated violently. It put him to shame, he repeated many times. “Brawling beneath my face, cries in my ears, and the smell of bloodshed in my nose.”</p>
				<p>Norfolk repeated dully that the Protestants were wondrous insolent. But Cromwell pointed out with a genial amusement: “My Lord Duke should have housed the City men within the palace. Cat will fight with dog the world over if you set them together.”</p>
				<p>The Duke answered malignantly:</p>
				<p>“It was fitting the citizens should wait to enter. I would not cumber his Highness’ courtyards. We know not yet that this Lady cometh to be welcomed Queen.”</p>
				<p>“Body of God,” the King said with a new violence: “do ye prate of these matters?” His heavy jaws threatened like a dog’s. “Hast thou set lousy knaves debating of these?”</p>
				<p>Norfolk answered darkly that it had been treated of in the Council last night.</p>
				<p>“My Council! My Council!” The King seemed to bay out the words. “There shall some mothers’ sons rue this!”</p>
				<p>Norfolk muttered that he had spoken of it with no man not a Councillor. The King’s Highness’ self had moved first in this.</p>
				<p>Henry suddenly waved both hands at the sky.</p>
				<p>“Take you good order,” he said heavily into the lean and yellow face of the Duke. “Marshal these ceremonies fitly from henceforth. Let nothing lack. Get you gone.” An end must be made of talk and gossip. The rumour of last night’s Council must appear an idle tale, a falsehood of despairing Papists. “The Queen cometh,” he said.</p>
				<p>With the droop of the Duke’s long arms his hat seemed to brush the stones, his head fell on his chest. It was finished.</p>
				<p>He had seen so many things go that he loved. And now this old woman with her Germans, her heresies⁠—her children doubtless⁠—meant the final downfall of the Old Order in his day. It would return, but he would never see it. And under Cromwell’s sardonic gaze his head hung limply, and his eyes filled with hot and blinding drops. His face trembled like that of a very old man.</p>
				<p>The King had thrust his hand through Cromwell’s arm, and, with a heavy familiarity as if he would make him forget the Council of last night, he was drawing him away towards the water-gate. He turned his head over his shoulder and repeated balefully:</p>
				<p>“The Queen cometh.”</p>
				<p>As he did so his eye fell upon a man tugging at the bridle of a mule that had a woman on its back. He passed on with his minister.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
